ci-setups/python-github.md, before:


# Python CI/CD Setup on GitHub

## Table of Contents
- [1. Introduction](#1-introduction)
- [2. Getting Started](#2-getting-started)
- [3. Workflow Configuration](#3-workflow-configuration)
- [4. Setting up Python Environment](#4-setting-up-python-environment)
- [5. Dependency Management](#5-dependency-management)
- [6. Running Tests](#6-running-tests)
- [7. Linting and Code Quality](#7-linting-and-code-quality)
- [8. Example YAML Configuration](#8-example-yaml-configuration)
- [9. Advanced Features](#9-advanced-features)
- [10. Troubleshooting](#10-troubleshooting)
- [11. Conclusion](#11-conclusion)

## 1. Introduction
This document provides guidelines for setting up Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) for Python projects on GitHub using GitHub Actions. It aims to ensure consistent and reliable workflows for Python development.

## 2. Getting Started
Before you begin, ensure you have a GitHub account, a Python project hosted on GitHub, and a basic understanding of GitHub workflows and Python development.

## 3. Workflow Configuration
Create a `.github/workflows` directory in your project. Inside this directory, create a YAML file (e.g., `python_ci.yml`) to define your workflow.

### 3.1 Triggers
Specify when your workflow should run. Common triggers are `push` and `pull_request` events.

### 3.2 Jobs
Define jobs such as `build`, `test`, and `deploy`. Each job runs in a fresh virtual environment.

### 3.3 Steps
Within each job, define steps such as checking out the code, setting up Python, installing dependencies, and running tests.

## 4. Setting up Python Environment
Use the `actions/setup-python` action to set up Python. Specify the version of Python you want to use.

## 5. Dependency Management
Install dependencies using pip. You can cache dependencies to speed up the build process.

## 6. Running Tests
Choose a testing framework like `pytest` or `unittest`. Create a step in your workflow to run tests.

## 7. Linting and Code Quality
Integrate tools like `flake8` or `pylint` to enforce code quality. Add steps in your CI workflow to run these tools.

## 8. Example YAML Configuration
Here is an example of a basic GitHub Actions workflow file for a Python project:
```yaml
name: Python CI

on:
  push:
    branches: [ main ]
  pull_request:
    branches: [ main ]

jobs:
  build:

    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    strategy:
      matrix:
        python-version: [3.9]

    steps:
    - name: Checkout code
      uses: actions/checkout@v2

    - name: Set up Python ${{ matrix.python-version }}
      uses: actions/setup-python@v2
      with:
        python-version: ${{ matrix.python-version }}

    - name: Install dependencies
      run: |
        pip install -r requirements.txt

    - name: Run linting
      run: |
        flake8 .
```
### Note:
```Update the python version in yaml file based on your project need.```

## 9. Advanced Features
Explore advanced GitHub Actions features such as:
- **Matrix Builds**: Test across multiple versions of Python.
- **Artifacts**: Upload test results or coverage reports.
- **Environments**: Define environment variables or secrets.

## 10. Troubleshooting
If your CI build fails, check the logs in GitHub Actions. Ensure your local development environment matches the CI environment.

## 11. Conclusion
CI/CD is a crucial part of modern software development. Proper setup ensures that your Python projects are tested and deployed consistently and reliably.

---

*This document is a guideline and should be adapted to fit the specific needs of your Python project.*

Commit message:

docs: add sample repository link

ci-setups/python-github.md, after:


# Python CI/CD Setup on GitHub

## Table of Contents
- [1. Introduction](#1-introduction)
- [2. Getting Started](#2-getting-started)
- [3. Workflow Configuration](#3-workflow-configuration)
- [4. Setting up Python Environment](#4-setting-up-python-environment)
- [5. Dependency Management](#5-dependency-management)
- [6. Running Tests](#6-running-tests)
- [7. Linting and Code Quality](#7-linting-and-code-quality)
- [8. Example YAML Configuration](#8-example-yaml-configuration)
- [9. Advanced Features](#9-advanced-features)
- [10. Troubleshooting](#10-troubleshooting)
- [11. Sample Repository](#11-sample-repository)
- [12. Conclusion](#12-conclusion)

## 1. Introduction
This document provides guidelines for setting up Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) for Python projects on GitHub using GitHub Actions. It aims to ensure consistent and reliable workflows for Python development.

## 2. Getting Started
Before you begin, ensure you have a GitHub account, a Python project hosted on GitHub, and a basic understanding of GitHub workflows and Python development.

## 3. Workflow Configuration
Create a `.github/workflows` directory in your project. Inside this directory, create a YAML file (e.g., `python_ci.yml`) to define your workflow.

### 3.1 Triggers
Specify when your workflow should run. Common triggers are `push` and `pull_request` events.

### 3.2 Jobs
Define jobs such as `build`, `test`, and `deploy`. Each job runs in a fresh virtual environment.

### 3.3 Steps
Within each job, define steps such as checking out the code, setting up Python, installing dependencies, and running tests.

## 4. Setting up Python Environment
Use the `actions/setup-python` action to set up Python. Specify the version of Python you want to use.

## 5. Dependency Management
Install dependencies using pip. You can cache dependencies to speed up the build process.

## 6. Running Tests
Choose a testing framework like `pytest` or `unittest`. Create a step in your workflow to run tests.

## 7. Linting and Code Quality
Integrate tools like `flake8` or `pylint` to enforce code quality. Add steps in your CI workflow to run these tools.

## 8. Example YAML Configuration
Here is an example of a basic GitHub Actions workflow file for a Python project:
```yaml
name: Python CI

on:
  push:
    branches: [ main ]
  pull_request:
    branches: [ main ]

jobs:
  build:

    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    strategy:
      matrix:
        python-version: [3.9]

    steps:
    - name: Checkout code
      uses: actions/checkout@v2

    - name: Set up Python ${{ matrix.python-version }}
      uses: actions/setup-python@v2
      with:
        python-version: ${{ matrix.python-version }}

    - name: Install dependencies
      run: |
        pip install -r requirements.txt

    - name: Run linting
      run: |
        flake8 .
```
### Note:
```Update the python version in yaml file based on your project need.```

## 9. Advanced Features
Explore advanced GitHub Actions features such as:
- **Matrix Builds**: Test across multiple versions of Python.
- **Artifacts**: Upload test results or coverage reports.
- **Environments**: Define environment variables or secrets.

## 10. Troubleshooting
If your CI build fails, check the logs in GitHub Actions. Ensure your local development environment matches the CI environment.

## 11. Sample Repository

[Repository Link](https://github.com/OsmosysSoftware/angular-eslint-workflow-guide) 

Explore this for practical demonstration of CI setups.

## 12. Conclusion
CI/CD is a crucial part of modern software development. Proper setup ensures that your Python projects are tested and deployed consistently and reliably.

---

*This document is a guideline and should be adapted to fit the specific needs of your Python project.*
